(energetic music)
(audience applauding)
- Hey, hello, it is really nice to be here
in Amsterdam again.
So yeah, as Tab said, I've
kind of been doing things
on the web for a very long time.
I do all kinds of things,
it's very hard for me
to tell conferences exactly
what they should put
on my badge as my kind of job.
I do lots of things, let's say importantly
I am the W3C representative for Fronteers,
I've been asked to mention
that we have a meetup this evening
which you can come along to,
I'll be speaking at that as well,
because I like to speak
about CSS twice in one day.
So do come along though,
it should be good fun.
So really for this talk though,
I've been really teaching CSS for as long
as I've been writing CSS and
that's kind of about 20 years.
I've written an awful lot of books
and articles and so on.
And one of those books
was titled, not by me, as,
"Everything You Know About CSS is Wrong".
And it was a ridiculous title.
But maybe today I could
almost justify using that.
Because I've taught CSS and CSS for layout
in pretty much the same
way everybody else has.
This is a block thing,
this is an inline thing.
You can change the things
between block and inline.
Hey, this is the box
model, it's very important.
But it's also a bit weird.
And then we do this stuff
with widths and floats
to try and make something
that looks like a grid.
And over the past few
years I've been writing
and speaking about our new layout methods.
I've been talking about Flexbox and Grid
and I'm constantly reordering my material,
often kind of on the fly in
front of people in workshops
as I kind of hear questions
that don't quite make sense
and I realize that
people haven't quite got
what we're teaching.
And it's become apparent to
me that the way that we have
taught CSS doesn't really
work with the new systems
that we're creating.
It's not giving people the
ability to master new layout.
And more than that, more
importantly than that,
I think that our continued
teaching and talking
about CSS as if it's some
kind of weird, quirky thing
encourages people to not take
it seriously as a language.
And to do all they can to
kind of avoid using features
that are part of the language.
So in this talk, I'm going
to describe CSS Layout
as a system in a way that I
believe we need to set it out.
How we need to set out our
store when we talk to people
about CSS Layout.
And I'm doing this not to teach you CSS,
'cause I'm pretty sure that
most of you in this room
know a lot of this stuff, but to show you
how to talk about CSS to your teams,
or when you're writing
articles or teaching people
or answering questions on Twitter,
'cause I think a lot of us are teaching,
even if we wouldn't
call ourselves teachers.
Because I believe that
if we want this language
to be seen as a real language,
as something important and elegant,
and to be seen in the same
light as other things,
we really have to start talking about it
in that way, in the way that
we want it to be treated.
Other languages, when we
approach them with beginners,
if we've got a complete
beginner to programming,
we begin with the important
constructs of working
with those languages.
So you know, if you're
teaching someone JavaScript,
you're going to teach them
variables, basic math,
string handling, conditional logic.
You do all of that
before you start saying,
well, hack around with this website.
With CSS what we do is we
teach a couple of things,
and then we just start getting people
to poke things around and
hope that it sort of works.
They're not giving them
a best way to start
on a good footing, and it's no wonder then
that people become reliant on frameworks
often going to Stack Overflow
and just copying and pasting
the nearest thing they see.
And asking questions, even a
very long way down the line
of them working with CSS
that make you realize
that they don't actually understand
what is going on in the language
when they're doing things.
So this is really my
attempt to kind of try
and create a robust footing for layout.
And you'll notice here that
I've not actually mentioned
sort of Grid and Flexbox
as independent things.
Because I think that by treating them
as independent things, we're
adding to this strange idea
that when you pick
between Grid and Flexbox,
it's like choosing between
Bootstrap and Foundation.
Instead, we need to find the fundamentals
and teach the fundamentals.
And while you're doing
that, you can introduce
an awful lot of Grid and
Flexbox along the way,
because that's how we can
demonstrate these things.
But once people understand the underlying
fundamental parts of the system,
the things that tie together
the headline features
of Flexbox and Grid, a
lot of the rest is really
just learning syntax.
So CSS has a system for layout.
It's how we allow webpages
and web applications
and the main layout methods all belong
to the display property.
They're essentially
just a value of display.
If you want to do layout,
you are changing the value
of display, so that's really
the best place to start.
What is display?
And everything starts on
the web with Normal Flow,
with block and inline layout.
We're always returning to that.
And we need to understand
this is the default state
of layout, the state to which we return
if we don't do anything else.
Items that participate in
the block formatting context.
We often talk about this
as kind of being no layout,
but it's layout, it's
block and inline layout.
Each box is a block
thing or an inline thing.
And if you write some
HTML and just open it up
in a web browser, there
it is, your HTML document
defining a block formatting context,
and the items inside participating in it.
The block things do what block things do,
and the inline things do
what inline things do.
And we have some readable content,
because CSS is doing
some work for us there,
by way of the browser's
inbuilt style sheet,
before we actually write any CSS.
And I think it's pretty important for us
to understand Normal Flow in this way,
as actually a layout method.
And it's important for
us to teach it this way.
Because right out of the gate,
CSS is doing this stuff for us.
We don't need to define the way
that every single HTML element looks.
We don't have to worry
about things overlapping on our page.
CSS is doing that for us.
How fortunate are we to
have this amazing framework
that gives us this great
starting point for our designs?
And it's very important that we work
with it, not against it.
If we strip everything away
with a heavy handed reset
style sheet, then we're losing
something really useful,
something which is actually doing a bunch
of our work for us.
We have to end up putting
everything back in.
So once we understand
that we've got layout,
and our items are participating
in the block format in
context, we better understand
what it is to change the value of display,
to create a different kind of layout.
My items here are displaying one
below the other as block items.
If I change the value of display
on their container to flex,
the items now display
alongside each other.
They're now flex items.
They're not participating in
that block's formatting context,
they're doing their own thing,
they're in a flex formatting context.
And that comes with some initial values
of the various flex properties.
So our things here are displaying in a row
by default because
that's the initial value.
They're not stretching,
they're all aligned to start,
they're not stretching on the main axis.
So that's kind of the basic values
of those flex items.
Now if I change the value to grid,
the items now participate in
a grid formatting context.
Now by default when you create a grid,
you end up with a one column grid,
so then we just get a single column grid,
actually doesn't look very different.
And so we need to add
some column or row tracks
to make something happen,
so here I've added
three column tracks and so
I get a three column grid.
But whether we say display grid
or whether we say display flex,
we're only doing that on that element.
It becomes the grid container
or the flex container,
and its children become
grid or flex items.
Their children go right
back to doing flow layout.
And we can see that if
I add some more content
to one of my grid items, a
header and two paragraphs,
they go right back to flow layout.
And so it goes all the way down
through the structure of your site.
You can stay with that flow layout,
the block formatting
context, or you can switch
to other formatting context.
Inside that, you're going
to return to flow layout
unless you make that decision again
and change the value of display.
One box at a time all the way down.
And once we're thinking like this,
it becomes much easier
to switch layout methods.
If your flex display
isn't kind of working out
how you want it to, oh
well let's try grid,
let's try display grid
and add some columns
and have a look at that instead.
Does that pattern work better?
Does this work better for the thing
that I'm trying to layout?
We're not seeing Grid
and Flexbox as these two
different competing layout methods.
They're just values of display
and we use the one that
works best for the type
of content we're trying to lay
out at this particular time.
And it's within display
that we see this refactoring
of CSS in large.
The display specification
now details two values
for display, not one.
We're used to saying
things like display grid,
display flex, with one value.
The specification actually
breaks this down into two.
So we have an outer display
type and an inner display type.
The outer display type
is always block or inline
and the inner display type is the one
that the children use which
might be block or inline layout,
it might be grid or flex.
It might be something else yet undefined.
So when we say display
grid, we're really saying
display block grid.
The outer box of this element is a block,
the children of this box are grid items.
Or if we say display
flex, we're really saying
display block flex, create
me a block level box
with flex children.
We have what is now termed
in the specification,
if you look at the specification,
what are they called?
Legacy values of display,
which things like
inline-grid and inline-flex,
with a little hyphen in there.
Now they would end up in our
two value world as display
inline-flex and inline-grid.
This currently just in the specification.
I believe that Firefox have
started to implement this,
but at the moment you can't
actually use these two values
of display on the web.
But I think they're very interesting
in terms of how we think about display,
how we think about the effect
that changing display has on our content.
So we think about our outer display type.
That's how does that box
behave in the layout?
Is it a block box, is it an inline box?
That's gonna make a
difference to how it behaves
amongst all of the other boxes
that are in our layout.
And then we have this inner display type.
The formatting context
of the direct children.
And that might be grid
or flex or what have you.
But then there are things
that behave a little bit differently
to the things that are part of display.
We have things which break out of flow.
They break the chain.
We can remove an element from flow
and it stops doing this nice thing
where we don't have to worry
about things overlapping
and hiding your content.
Now the most obvious way to remove an item
from normal flow, and
the one that if you asked
a bunch of web developers how
to take an item out of flow,
they would probably tell you
that it is to use position.
To set something to position absolute.
That will very obviously
take it out of Normal Flow.
So we say position absolute,
and use the offset values
and we take the item out of flow
and position it.
Now as I mentioned at
the start, by default CSS
does not overlap your content.
So you can put some stuff on a page.
You don't have to worry that things
are gonna get hidden by other things.
But the minute you start
to use positioning,
you're basically saying hey,
I am taking control here.
I wanna take this thing
and I am gonna dump it
on top of my content and
that's absolutely fine.
I'm gonna deal with the overlaps.
So you've kinda taken control back
the minute you start to
take things out of flow.
It's your responsibility
to make sure that your user
can now read the rest of the content.
And then there are floats.
Which perhaps if you
aren't someone who spends
your life reading CSS specs,
they might not really seem
to be an out of flow thing,
because they appear in the
document pretty much where
you expect them to appear.
The text wraps around, but the
thing doesn't get lifted up
and dumped somewhere else,
it doesn't overlap things.
Or do they?
If you've ever added a
background color to content
wrapping a float, you see
they actually are out of flow.
It's the line boxes of the
content that become shortened
in order to wrap round the thing,
but the actual box is taken out of flow.
There's no space for it, and
so the thing that follows it
just comes up behind
and its background color
is shown behind the floated item.
So again, we've got this
overlapping thing going on.
And so here we can go back
and have another little look
at the display specification
and to the value of flow-root.
Our page establishes an initial
block formatting context.
Sometimes written as a BFC if
you're reading specifications.
And that has some features
Floats can't poke out of the
bottom of that container.
If this was the case, if they
could poke out the bottom,
then a float could end
up essentially ending up
outside of the viewport, if it was taller
than the content, so we
know that doesn't happen.
And sometimes it might
be useful to create a new
block formatting context
in the middle of our layout
to say hey, this box
here, everything needs
to stay inside it, the
floats, the margins,
everything else should be
contained inside this box,
they shouldn't be getting out.
And that's what display flow-root does.
It creates a new block formatting context
just like the page.
It contains everything inside
it, contains the floats.
Now this actually is exactly
what you've been doing
if you've ever used the overflow
property to contain floats.
Because when you use
overflow you get a new block
formatting context,
because you're gonna maybe
have scroll bars and you need everything
to be inside that box when
you have your scroll bars.
You can't have things poking out of it.
So when you use overflow you
create a new block formatting
context everything stays in.
That's been a little bit of a hack
to do this kind of float
containing behavior,
with the occasional poor
effect of clipping your shadows
or ending up with scroll bars
where you weren't wanting scroll bars.
And also it being a little bit mysterious
in your style sheet.
Did the original developer
really want scroll bars?
Or were they trying to do
this containing floats thing?
And so now we have this
value of display flow-root
that let's you just say, hey, right here,
new block formatting context.
Let's start over with a new
block formatting context,
everything should stay inside this box.
And then, I want to talk
about writing modes.
Because when Flexbox and
Grid landed in our browsers,
they did so in a way
that quietly introduced
a kind of agnostic writing
mode way of working
with the document.
Everything that came
before Flexbox and Grid
related to the physical
dimensions of the screen.
So we talked about top right, bottom left
for pretty much everything in CSS.
We talk about horizontal
and vertical x and y.
And when Flexbox and then Grid came along,
we were asking people to
think about start and end,
and the block and inline dimensions.
And this line numbering which
is related to writing mode.
And this was quite puzzling to people.
They're like, "Well why
can't I just say left?
"Because that's what I've
always been doing in my designs.
"Everything works according
to the screen dimensions."
And so these sort of concepts
that are in writing modes
are critical to our
understanding of layout today.
So before we do anything else,
before we go do anything
more complicated with layout,
we need to understand writing modes.
We need to make sure that we
understand which way is block
and which way is inline.
So the block dimension is the direction
in which blocks are
displayed down the page.
So in English, that's
language written horizontally,
blocks are displayed vertically,
so one on top of the other.
And the inline dimension is the dimension
along which our words run in a sentence,
so in English that's left
to right horizontally.
In Arabic that would be right to left.
And these things relate
to our understanding
of block and inline layout.
Because inline boxes all
line up next to each other
in the inline direction.
So if we use a vertical writing mode,
now the block dimension
is running horizontally,
and the inline, vertically.
So if you've been asked to think
about start in the block
dimension or line one in grid,
then this is the line at
which blocks would start.
So in English that's
at the top of the page.
In a vertical RL, that
would be on the right.
That's your block start
where the blocks end,
that's block end.
And if you need to think about start
in the inline direction
or line one in grid,
that's where a sentence
begins in the writing mode
that you're currently using,
or that the element is using.
So on the left for English,
on the right for Arabic.
So this is inline start.
And where your sentences
end, well that is inline end.
And so here we find this
tension between the fact
that our new layout methods
are pretty much agnostic,
it doesn't matter which
way up your grid is.
Doesn't matter which way
up your flex items are.
And they refer to block and inline.
Everything else is still
tied to physical dimensions.
You set your margins, you do
it on top right, bottom left.
You float things left.
And as you try and build
something using a vertical
writing mode, now that might
be because you're working
in a language that is set that way,
but probably more likely for most of us
is because we want to
do something creative
and we thought well if we tip something
on its side that's gonna be pretty cool
and we can play around with it.
Now when you start doing that,
this conflict becomes very apparent.
So we should be able
to build a grid layout,
as I've got a grid layout here.
And I've got one of
the items there is just
in horizontal writing mode
and I've given it a width and a height.
Now if we changed it to
a vertical writing mode,
the actual grid layout
works absolutely fine,
but you can see that the
dimensions are still tied
to physical dimensions
because a width is a width.
It doesn't matter which
writing mode you're in.
So they don't relate to
the logical dimensions
of block or inline.
They're not related to
the flow of content.
And so to solve this
problem we have a whole new
CSS specification, logical
properties and values.
It's essentially a series of mappings
saying hey, this is this
in the physical world,
so in the logical flow
relative world, it is this.
There are a huge number of these mappings,
I know because I documented it for MDN
so I created an awful
lot of pages for each
of these different properties and values.
So we've got one for
pretty much everything
that is a physical sort of
property or value in CSS.
So with the example I just showed you,
instead of using width and
height we could use inline size
and block size, which
then means when we tip
our grid over it stays
with the same dimensions
relative to the flow of the content.
So our gridded component now can work
in exactly the same way no matter
which direction the writing mode is going.
If I am working in vertical writing mode,
I often build the thing the right way up,
because it saves you having
your head on the side like this.
And as long as you use
those logical properties
and values you can do that,
you can just then tip it over.
And so because we already
understand the block
and inline dimensions
these names should start
to make sense, the block
size property is the size
in the block dimension,
which is the horizontal writing mode,
in if you're in height.
The inline size property is the
size in the inline dimension
which in a horizontal
writing mode is width.
If you turn the grid on
its side using writing mode
the block and inline dimensions change,
and therefore block size maps to width
and inline size to height.
This is incredibly
difficult to talk about.
You see. (laughs)
(audience laughing)
And it gets worse.
Because we have all these
mappings for margin-block-start
and margin-block-end defining
the top and bottom margins
if you're in a horizontal writing mode
and then we will have margin-inline-start
and margin-inline-end, would
be the inline-start and end,
so that would be left and right
if you're in a horizontal writing mode.
We have padding, and then
we even have border radius,
which are my absolute favorites.
(audience members chuckling)
(audience member speaking quietly)
Because you have things
like border top left radius,
which is bad enough, so
that is your top left.
So in a horizontal writing
mode of the left to right
direction if you want that left corner
you're going to get
border-start-start-radius.
Because it is the start of the inline
and the start of the block dimension.
Now, generally you probably
won't be using those too often.
We tend not to use the
long hands of border radius
all that often, but yes,
they are my favorite
for length if nothing else.
But in terms of teaching
and understanding CSS,
know that we are moving
to this flow-relative, logical world.
Browser support for these
mappings is getting very good.
It'll be a while before
we sort of feel happy
to use them everywhere, but
in terms of teaching CSS,
they're really really important
because this is how the
layout methods work.
They expect we're working
in this logical world.
Grid and Flexbox make so much more sense
when seen through a lens of writing modes.
So once you start to
think about start and end,
block and inline, everything
makes a lot more sense.
Especially when you come
to a key specification,
which is part of working
with Grid and Flexbox.
Box alignment.
In this specification
awful lot of what we do
in Grid and Flexbox is pulled together.
Box alignment deals
with obviously alignment
and also space distribution between boxes.
So alignment is defined for
all of our layout methods.
And for flex and for
grid, but also for block
and inline layout, which
means that we can have
this consistent alignment
no matter what we do.
Whichever method of display we're using,
we should be able to have
consistent alignment.
And the reason that we needed
to talk about writing modes
before we talk about alignment
is because everything
we do in alignment worries
about these dimensions,
the block and inline and start and end
are how we do alignment.
So when we talk about
alignment we need to talk
about two things, we need to talk
about the distribution
of space between items
in a particular formatting context
and we need to talk about
the alignment of items
within the little area that they're in.
So they're two different things
that affect the alignment of content.
Now the first, the distribution
of space around elements.
Now I think that all of
alignment is much easier
to teach people if you use
grid layout as an example.
Because in grid we always
have the two dimensions.
And from there you can
explain how it differs
in other things.
So if we have a grid here
with fixed size tracks,
they're not large enough
to fill the grid area,
this orange box is the grid area.
And that means that we've
got some spare space
to play with.
Now the tracks are all
aligned to start in their,
in both dimensions, that's
their initial values.
So if I wanted to space things
out in the inline dimension,
I use justify-content.
If you're in grid,
justify, it's a bit like
if you justify words in a line,
so the justify properties always work
in the inline dimension.
If I wanted to space these
out in the block dimension,
I would use align-content.
So we have justify-content, space-between,
and I've got the FireFox grid
inspector turned on there
so you can kind of see
the spaces stretching out
as we give space between our grid tracks
in the inline dimension.
In the block dimension
we'll use align-content,
and that again, will
be space distribution,
but in the block dimension,
and this time I've aligned
the content to end, so
all that spare space
has been put before the
tracks and the tracks
are then at the bottom.
Now Flexbox is a bit different to Grid,
because not only have we got the block
and inline dimensions going on,
we can actually change the axis can't we?
We can say we've got a main axis
and a cross axis.
So in Flexbox we justify on
the main axis which by default will be row
if you haven't done anything else,
which then is the inline dimension.
So we justify on the main axis
and align on the cross axis.
So in flex justify-content
is your main axis space distribution.
So here we can say
justify-content flex-end
and the spare space is
put before the items
and they all go to the end.
Align-content is our cross
axis space distribution
between the flex lines so you
need to have more than one
flex line and you need
to have some spare space,
but then you can do
align-content space-around
and that's actually the
Firefox flex inspector,
which is pretty new, which
gives you some information
about your flex items their
spacing and sizing and so on.
If you haven't tried that
out it's really worth
playing around with if
you're learning Flexbox
or if you're teaching Flexbox
to someone else to have that visual
understanding of what's going on.
And here is the question I am asked
constantly and I have people reporting
bugs to me with Flexbox and Grid saying,
"This isn't working, my
alignments not working."
It's because they've
not got any spare space.
If you're using the
content properties you need
to have spare space to distribute.
If you have a tightly
packed grid container,
a tightly packed flex container,
if you don't have multiple flex lines,
you're not gonna have
any space to distribute,
and so they're not going to do anything.
This is very frequently reported to me.
If you're teaching people Flexbox and Grid
that's a good thing to point out.
So then you have to align
your items inside your area.
Again, much easier to understand in grid.
I've got grid items here
they're all displayed
within their area and they're stretched
over different cells.
The properties we need to use here are
justify-self and align-self.
Now the initial values for
those properties are stretch
which means that the
thing that we tried to do
for so long with floated layouts
to have equal height columns
is the default behavior
of our new layout methods,
which I kind of like.
So it's saying, yes you've always wanted
to do this, so here now you
can just do it by default.
You line things up they
will stretch to full height.
Now the only time that we
don't stretch things is
for items which have an aspect ratio.
So if say you have an
image as a grid item,
it will be aligned to
start rather than stretch
because generally you
don't want your images
to be stretched.
You certainly don't want that to happen
if you weren't expecting it.
So to align on the inline
axis we again use the property
which starts with justify.
So justify-self end.
On the first item aligns it to the end
of the inline dimension.
And on the block axis we're
using the properties with align.
So align-self end aligns it
to the end on the block dimension.
And we can set them all at once
if we go to the grid container,
we can say justify-items
end and align-items end
and they go to the end.
Switch into Flexbox and
we do not have a concept
of justify-self on the main axis.
The reason being that
there's no area as in grid,
we're dealing with all of the items sort
of as a group rather than individually.
So this is where we see
that the specification is
saying something different
for a certain layout method.
It's saying, well this layout method,
you can't do both ways,
like you can on grid.
So here you can't use this property.
So we can't align individual items.
We can however, align
them on the cross axis
because you can move things up and down
against each other on the cross axis
if you've got extra space on that axis.
Perhaps because you've got a
height on the flex container
or you've got some taller items
in that container making it taller.
So align-self will align a single item.
Align-items on the parents
will align them all.
Now if you do need self alignment of items
on the main axis, there is a way to do it.
And it's in the spec.
You can use auto margins
to align a single item
or group of items sorta separate
them out from the others.
Because auto margins
absorb any available space
in the dimension they are set in.
It's why you can center a
block with auto margins.
You give it a margin left of
auto, a margin right of auto,
it pushes the block into the middle.
We've all been centering our
layouts like that forever.
So if you apply an auto margin
to a flex item it will take precedence
over the justify-content alignment
and kind of push the item over now.
Now as we saw, this is
described in the specification.
It's not a hack, it's not making
use of some weird behavior
that someone noticed
once on Stack Overflow.
And this leads me to another thing
about talking about this stuff.
Let's stop calling
things a trick or a hack
when we are literally using CSS
the way it has been designed.
Because if we go around
talking about this stuff as
if it's weird and quirky
then people assume
the whole language is weird and quirky
and that it's just a series of hacks.
And yes, it kind of has been,
but it doesn't need to be anymore.
So when you're talking about things
that exist in the spec, show
people the specification.
Say, "Here, this is a
real way to do things.
"This is how it's been designed."
And while we're talking about design,
there's some interesting things
that you find that have kind of come out
of CSS working group discussions.
And some of these things are things
that we spent an awful
lot of time talking about.
When we designed CSS, when we're creating
this layout system, we
want to prevent data loss.
Right at the start I said,
"You know, things don't
overlap all over each other
"when we lay things out in CSS."
You know, we try very hard
to keep your content visible
on the page that's really
important because actually
if things go missing,
it's hard to identify
that something's gone missing.
If the button on your form has ended up
behind another element,
you may not spot that.
It's really hard to spot that
something's just not there.
And people are like, "How
do I fill in this form?
"There's no button."
If it all just kind of overlays messily,
you will probably see the messy overlay
or at the very least your
customers will contact you
and say, "You know, I'm using this browser
"and everything's all a mess."
Now at least you can go and fix it then,
but they probably won't identify
that something has gone missing.
So we tend to have visible
overflow if we have to.
We don't go around causing data loss
and hiding your content.
So alignment's a situation
where you could get data loss.
In some cases you could
align an item in such a way
that it kind of pushes part of it
off the edge of the viewport for example,
out of the sort of scrollable
area that you're working in.
And so here I've got a stack
of flex items as column
they've been aligned to center,
one of them's huge and so if it's aligned
to center it's gonna get pushed
off the edge of the screen.
You're not gonna be able
to get to some of it.
That would obviously be
suboptimal most of the time.
So we've got these alignment
keywords, safe and unsafe.
Use the unsafe keyword and
CSS will honor your alignment,
even if that means something vanishes.
If you're it saying I
want unsafe alignment,
you're basically saying,
just like with position,
"I would like this, I would like this
"to work the way I've asked for it."
And it could be 'cause
you've got some plans for it.
You're using the fact that you can do that
for some creative way or what have you.
Now again, this isn't a hacky system.
These things have been
thought through and designed.
And so then we have sizing.
This is the specification
until very recently was known
as the CSS intrinsic and
extrinsic sizing specification.
I am not unhappy that I won't have to say
that on stage so often because it's now
being called box sizing.
It defines how big
things are in our layout.
And you might have noticed
that at no point so far,
I've been talking about the box model.
And this isn't because I don't think
it's kind of totally unimportant,
I think it's just far less
important than it used to be.
And I say that as someone
who must have explained
the box model in a different
way at least a hundred times
across all of the writing that I've done,
all of them with badly drawn diagrams.
But when we had to control the size
of each item in our layout,
when we had to actually figure out
how big everything was the box model was
really really important.
And also because we all know that
until very recently the
size we gave our items
wasn't even the width
they took up on the screen
once padding and borders and
so on, was taken into account.
And I think it's there that we need
to introduce people to the box model.
So this is kind of my quick
guide to the box model
with added dev tools because
that's a really good way for
you to see what's going on.
Obviously everything in CSS is a box,
but the block level box
is a very specific thing.
Expands to fill the inline direction
and it grows in the block dimension
to the size of the content.
And we can give it a
width and maybe a height.
When we do, CSS has to decide what it is
that we mean about that.
It does that while taking
into account all the
different bits of the box.
So the box has the content,
and we refer to that as the content box.
You might then give it a bit
of padding if you do that it's added
around the content and the
edge of this is referred
to as the padding box.
The box might also have a visible border.
If you do then the size of this border is
added to the outside of the padding
and this is the border box.
And the box also might have a margin
and that's then added to the outside
of the border pushing things
away that are outside the box.
And that defines the margin box.
So if your box has a width or height
or has an inline size and a block size,
what is that size?
Now, that size by default is the size
of the content box so that's the size
of the box before you've added
on your padding and your border.
So the visible space
it takes up is added on
to the size that you've given it.
Now I think a lot of people
find that rather confusing.
And so if you want the specified width
to include padding and border
set the box sizing property
to border box and then the visible thing
you can see, so everything
other than the margin,
that's the width you've set.
And that's pretty much what people need
to know about the box model.
We've got keywords that allow us to toggle
between the two different
ways of deciding sizing.
Now do you want your size to
be the size of the content box?
Do you want your size to be the size
of the content plus the
padding plus the border?
We don't need to go into all the history
at this point.
This is what it is,
here's how to change it.
And then we can move on to far
more useful things about sizing.
Now how is sizing worked out across all
of our new layout models?
So in the past, everything
was pretty much a percentage
or a length.
You've given your box a fixed size,
and in which case that's
the size it's going to get.
Now, that's how we've been doing layout.
We've been giving things a size
so that they would all
line up next to each other.
We hope that that size doesn't add up
to more than 100%, because
if it does bad things start
to happen, and as long as you know
everything fits in the line,
we kinda get something that
looks like a kind of grid.
Now having to specify
everything in lengths
and percentages and then doing the math
to make them line up is
really the way of the past.
Because our new layout methods
can do a lot of the work
for us but to understand how they're doing
that we need to understand a few concepts.
And the important things to understand,
is what is the minimum
size of this content
and what is the maximum
size of this content?
Because once we know
those two things we're
in a pretty good place
to start understanding
what the browser is doing
when it works out the size
of any individual thing
in our layout.
And we've got some keywords,
which they allow us to
actually size things
in that minimum and maximum size
so we can have a look at it.
And so they're a really
good place to start.
If we have a two column grid,
we've got our grid items there
and the grid items contain
variable amounts of text.
So the first column is set to min content
and the second to max content.
Now you can see that the
min content column has kind
of got as small as it can
without doing any overflows
and so it's soft wrapping
the items getting as small
as it can do and then
that's the size it gets to.
That's its min content size.
You can use those keywords if you want to
to size your grid tracks.
Now the second column has
gone to max content size,
which basically means that
because you've got text in there
it's sort of unraveled it's all gone,
it's stretched out as long as it can.
If you actually use max content
in a grid layout like this,
you could well cause an overflow.
'Cause if you have a very very long bit
of content in there
it's just going to keep
on going and end up poking out the box,
poking out the side of the viewport.
But that's important to know.
Things have got a max content size
which they can try to go to.
And so any content based sizing is going
to be working itself
out based on these min
and max content size.
Working out how to
distribute space based on how
big and how small the content is.
And sort of understand
that, I think Flexbox
is a really really good way to understand
what's going on there.
So if I've got three items
in my flex container,
now if we use the Flexbox initial values,
they don't grow to fill the space there's
enough room for them there,
so they're all going to
their max content size
and they're stopping as soon
as they've got to that size.
They're not adding on any
extra space that they need.
Now if I give them flex auto,
if you use flex auto things can grow
and they can shrink from auto.
So because they've all got an equal
flex fire, they've all
got essentially flex one,
they can all grow at the same rate.
Now it looks there like we've got
three equally sized items,
but that's only because they've got
about the same amount of content.
If we add more content to one
of the items you can see that
that item is getting more space assigned,
it's taking up the space
because it's max content size is very big.
But then once it kind of
gets to it all being full
and it starts to wrap, it
starts to lose the space
from its max content size
and the content starts to wrap.
And you see the small items,
they also start to wrap down
to their min content size,
but they'll not go smaller than that.
If you ended up with too much stuff
it would just overflow.
Or if you had flex wrap set to wrap
it would then start to wrap.
So that's kinda, Flexbox
is doing this thing
of looking at the min
and max content size.
What it's not doing is
looking at those things
and saying well we need
three equal size items
and therefore we're gonna have lots
of space around a small thing
and push the big thing into a tiny box.
If you actually do want that behavior
and sometimes you do, then use flex one.
That sets the flex basis to zero
which basically says none of
these things has got any size,
share all the space out accordingly.
You then get your three
equally sized items.
But the thing with Flexbox,
it's kind of best used for stuff
where you've got a bunch
of things of odd sizes
and you'd just like the
browser to lay it out
in the best way possible,
not put big things
in small boxes and small
things in big boxes.
Just have this kind of
squishy flexible sizing
and it does that very very
well when used for that job.
Now I've not talked yet
really about browser support.
Now pretty much everything
I've talked about is
available on at least one
browser if not more than one.
But I think as well as talking
about how CSS is designed,
and that it is a system,
we need to really rethink
how we talk about browser support
and explain CSS separately
from explaining you know,
what is supported in what.
And you might say, well what use is CSS
that we actually can't use?
But stay with me for a moment.
If we treat this as a system,
it's a system that's been designed.
We then have software that
implements this system.
Now just like when you write
a specification of a piece
of software that you're building,
sometimes you end up needing
to release it without some of the features
in your spec, because it's still useful
even without those things,
but it doesn't mean that
those things don't exist
or can't exist.
and it's a kind of
understandable state of affairs.
If we talk about the fact that yes,
there are browsers that don't support some
of this stuff and yes
it's probably coming.
That's understandable.
We don't have the problems
that we had in the past
where browsers had sort of
implemented different things
in wildly different ways.
These days browsers do not want,
they're not to be interrupt.
Nobody does, no one in the
CSS working group wants
there not to be interrupt between browsers
on any of these features.
CSS is designed by a
group of representatives
from those engines and no browser wants
to be doing something different
to what other browsers are doing.
And yes, sometimes one engine lags behind
on one feature or another.
And yes, there are sometimes
bugs, you know who knew?
Software gets bugs.
Sometimes the browser's implemented a spec
prior to some major change
and it's having to refactor it
as we're seeing with Firefox at the moment
who are about to ship
the updated scroll snap.
When they implemented an
earlier version of the spec.
But none of this these days
is due to browsers kind
of fighting out over CSS features.
It's due the fact that we do
have this iterative thing going
on where we're creating features.
And these days we've
even got feature queries,
the ability to say, "Hey browser
do you support this feature
"before I try and use it or
shall I do something else?"
We can fork our code accordingly.
Now so another part of this system
is this conditional logic.
We've got media queries,
we've got feature queries,
we can find out how big is this viewport?
Is my user using a touchscreen?
Does this browser support grid?
We can ask these
questions, get the answers,
do something in our code to
deal with it when we need to.
And why is this important?
Well as people who care about CSS
and I imagine since you're
sat in the CSS conference
you do care to some degree about CSS,
we need to stop talking
about it as this weird
and quirky thing.
In this room and coming after me are some
of the people who have done an amazing job
of refactoring CSS, of creating a cohesive
and a sensible layout
system out of a language
which is like no other because
it serves an environment
in fact, multiple environments,
that are like no other.
And just because it's
designed for an environment
that isn't like any other doesn't mean
that we can't teach it in a
robust and structured manner.
We can give people the
skills to use the CSS
of today the CSS, the CSS
that is coming tomorrow,
and be able to learn to cope
with the browsers of the
past where that is necessary.
Those of us whose teach
CSS and that's whether
that's within your team, answering
questions, writing books,
or articles, speaking at conferences.
Let's change the way we're
talking about the language.
Don't burden beginners with our history.
Let's keep the scars of the browser wars
for our own reminiscing
and keep moving forward
refactoring the way that we talk
about CSS thank you.
(audience applauding)
- All right, would you come sit over here?
Quick announcement before
we get started with the Q&A,
some people are sitting in the stairs,
but there's still some seats
in the middle and whatnot.
Everybody make sure to squeeze in,
nobody will bite, it is
against the code of conduct,
so that's fine.
All right, Rachel, wonderful talk.
That was a lot of fun.
I have one quick compliment and question.
I saw a bunch of synchronized
tweets coming out
from your account while you were talking.
How did you do that?
- They're just in buffer.
I know my timings. (laughs)
- Oh man, that is extremely impressive.
That was very good.
- It's very boring.
(both laughing)
- Still, it was nice to see it coming out.
All right, first question,
one from a Peter Coose.
Is flow-relative stuff
polyfillable via tools
like PostCSS or anything like that?
- I guess it is.
And I think I have seen something.
It's not something I've tried myself.
I think I have seen someone doing that.
I mean they are just mappings,
so there's no reason why not.
I probably wouldn't use them
particularly at the moment.
I think it's more
interesting that we have them
as a concept at the moment.
I think probably, I think
give us five, 10 years,
I think that's probably the default.
So we're probably use
flow-relatives by default
unless we want to use something physical
for whatever reason.
- Yeah.
- I think it's probably
a bit early at the moment
to actually use 'em for everything.
- Yeah.
A question from my own heart too,
because I went through
learning how to do CSS layout
back in the terrible days
of float base layout.
What are the most
important things to unlearn
from your own knowledge right now,
to act well in today's
modern CSS Layout world?
- Sizing.
Typically when people start to learn Grid
or Flexbox they try and size
everything in percentages.
And don't look at everything else
and then are confused
by things which are kind
of using content based sizing.
So something like the FR unit in grid.
Because everyone is so used to the fact
they have to have control over sizing.
And I think like with Flexbox,
sometimes just letting it get on with it,
letting it do its thing.
You'll get a good layout.
But we're not used to that.
And I think that takes people a while.
Interestingly, when I
teach complete beginners,
they get Grid and Flexbox
really really quickly.
When I teach people who've been doing CSS
for 10 years, they're like,
"Ahh! This is all terrible!
"So much of it is all new,
I don't understand any
"of it at all."
So yeah actually I think that what we have
is very understandable,
but we've got these layers
and layers of history to break through.
- It's so good to hear
that that stuff is easy
for new people to learn, that's great.
Let's, here, bah bah bah.
Quick question about viewport units.
Currently the main ones
we use are VW and VH,
which are clearly not
writing mode agnostic.
Do we have any plans for
writing mode relative
versions of the viewport units?
- I don't actually know.
You might know, do you?
- I do actually know.
- You. (laughs)
(audience laughing)
- The VI and VB units do exist,
- Of course, yes.
- For viewport inline,
- Yes they do.
- And viewport block.
Yeah.
So those'll be around, you
also have Vmin and Vmax
if you just wants the
smallest and largest ones.
Those work everywhere.
Uh, bah bah bah.
So you've talked about
teaching new layout modes
and whatnot, so when we
are teaching new people,
what do you suggest a starting point is?
Should we start with grid
before we go into flow,
or should we start with flow
and then do larger things?
- Absolutely start with flow.
I think the order in which
I've gone through things today
is kind of where I am ending up reordering
my own teaching of stuff.
I have lots of spreadsheets
of what has worked
and what doesn't, for when
I've been teaching people.
All the questions that I get.
And I'll be like, why are people asking me
that question at that point?
And then I kind of reorder
stuff and try it again.
And so yeah, I think that
just starting from the fact
that hey, we have layout here.
And then what do you wanna change
about that layout, rather
than fighting against it.
I think a lot of the time,
particularly with grid,
people are fighting
against the order of things
in the document.
And realizing that actually you don't need
to change very much and you get layout,
I think is quite a nice way to work.
- Okay.
One final question then.
While you rightly rail against talking
about normal CSS as being cute hacks
or anything like that,
dealing with legacy browsers,
we still do have to deal
with a lot of hacks.
So what's your like suggestion to help us
to talk about that and help us to deal
with the reality that we
still have a lot of CSS hacks
that we need to deal with?
- I think when you're dealing with that
from a basis of I understand CSS,
I understand how things should work,
and okay, the world isn't perfect.
So from that starting
point, what do I need to do
to get something which
works reasonably well
in IE9 or whatever?
So I have a product which
fairly recently still
supported IE9, so I know the pain.
I certainly don't live in an ivory tower.
I do real web development.
So, but I think that if you're starting
from a level of I understand
how this should be,
then, and particularly if
you're working component
by component actually fixing
the things in older browsers
becomes an awful lot less of a problem.
What is difficult is
when you don't understand
what's going on, you're just
kind of poking things around
and hoping that it will work.
That's not a good position to work from.
But if you work from this
is a sensible system,
sometimes you need to do these things
for these old browsers that haven't yeah,
caught up with the times yet.
That's easier to cope with I think.
- All right, thank you very much Rachel.
(audience applauding)